All applications require some form of initialization.
For example,
we might need to pass connection strings to the application so the
application knows how to connect to a database,
and this connection string should not be hardcoded.
These values change after the application has been deployed.
They might change for testing purposes, might change for many reasons.
For servlets, there are a couple of ways in which they can be initialized.
One way of doing it is via the web.xml file,
but another way of doing this,
since the Servlet 3.0 specification has been released is to use annotation.
We've seen annotations already, so here we have our WebServlet annotation,
and we can add an initParams field to this annotation that will let us
specify any initialization parameters that the servlet needs.
This initParams value is a set of name-value pairs.
So for example,
here we can pass in a connection string with some value
that identifies the server and the database to connect to
using that connection string.
Init parameters are typically used for the full life of the servlet,
which means that we should get the values as early as
possible and hold on to those values,
and we typically do that by overriding the init method from
GenericServlet and calling the getInitParameter helper method
that's also provided by GenericServlet.
To the getInitParameter method, we pass the name of the initialization parameter,
in this case connstr, and that gives us back the value.
And we put that value into a variable that we can then
use in our various servlet methods, such as doGet and doPost.
So this is the application more or less as we left it.
The thing that's changed now is that we've added an app name,
in this case My Application,
and changed the XML so that as well as displaying the name of the user,
it also outputs the name of the application.
This has been deployed.
If I go to the browser,
we can see that the XML that's produced contains the product element,
and that product element contains the text My Application.
This is currently a hardcoded value,
and we'd like to be able to change that using an initialization parameter.
As we've seen,
one way we can do this is by using the WebServlet annotation and
changing it to contain an initParams parameter.
So we can amend the annotation by adding initParams.
InitParams is a collection of WebInitParam annotations,
and each WebInitParam is a name-value pair.
In this case we have the name of ProductName and
the value of Welcome Application.
We can grab that value by calling getInitParameter,
and typically we do this inside the servlet's init method.
So inside the servlet, I can override the init method.
And inside here, I can say appName = getInitParameter,
pass in the name of the init parameter, which is ProductName.
Once we have that, we can redeploy the application,
go to the browser, and if we refresh, we should see a different product name.
There we go, it now says Welcome Application.
Init parameters are provided this way, through the annotation,
act as default values, and we can override those values in a web.xml file.
So here, for example, we provide a servlet,
we give the servlet a name and a class,
and then we can provide a set of init parameters to that servlet.
If we provide init parameters here with the same
name that are on the annotations, then we override those values.
Any parameters that we provide with different names get added to the set
of init parameters that are available to the servlet.
So here we can see we've added a parameter with the name of connstr,
which is the same as the name provided inside the annotation.
And we get at this thing in exactly the same way,
by calling getInitParameter in our overwritten init method.
When we add an init param annotation,
that's typically used to give us default values for the init parameter.
We can override those default values by providing init
parameters inside the web.xml file.
So if we go to the web.xml file, we can add an init parameter for our servlet.
To do that, we have to add a full servlet entry,
including the servlet name and the servlet mapping.
So, here we say servlet, the servlet has a name,
which we can call, let's say SimpleServlet,
and it has a class.
The class is the fully-qualified class name to our servlet,
so com.mantiso .SimpleServlet.
And then for this servlet, we provide any init parameters.
Again, in here we provide a collection of init parameters,
so we'd have for each one, init parameter,
each of these has a param-name, which in this case will be ProductName,
and a param-value.
And we'll give the param-value a different product name,
so Yet Another Product Name.
Again, we need to provide a servlet mapping.
So for this we can say servlet-mapping,
and in here we have SimpleServlet and the URL pattern.
And we choose a different URL pattern to one that's
already been defined in the annotations,
so let's just say other for simplicity here.
We can then take this and redeploy it, and now if we go to the browser,
in here we change the URL to say other,
and indeed we see Yet Another Product Name as the name of the product.
One thing you will have noticed is that we have a different URL pattern in the
web.xml file than we have in the web servlet annotation.
So here we have /home and * .do, whereas here we have /other.
Retreating slightly here,
if I try and change this to /home and redeploy the servlet,
if I go to the browser and refresh this page,
we'll get an error.
And this error is happening because we have a servlet here
called SimpleServlet to which we map /home.
But here, we haven't named the servlet.
We're still trying to map /home to whatever the
internal name of this servlet is, which turns out to be the fully-qualified name.
So in this case, com.mantiso .SimpleServlet,
and you can't match the same URL pattern to two different servlets.
To fix that, we can give the servlet a name.
So if we call this servlet SimpleServlet,
we can now change the mapping in the web.xml file from /other to /home.
If we redeploy and go to the browser,
we can refresh here and we're back where we were
originally with a servlet called simple,
and a URL mapping of home.
And this is another example of the web.xml file overriding an annotation.
So in the web.xml file, we're providing a URL pattern of /home,
and that's overriding these URL patterns defined here.
What this also means is that the * .do mapping will now have disappeared.
So back in the browser, if I try and say, / foo.do?
name=kevin, and again we'll get a 404.
As well as per-servlet initialization parameters,
there are also application-wide initialization parameters.
These are provided via the ServletContext.
The ServletContext allows the servlet to access its container.
And we can use the ServletContext to do things such as logging, for example.
We are using the ServletContext here to provide init params.
This is done by providing a context-param section in the web.xml file,
and then inside the servlet, calling getServletContext.getInitParameter,
and that will access the values from the context-param
section rather than from the servlet section.
What this means is that we can provide, for example,
a single connection string that can be used by all the servlets,
and maybe single logging information or the app name,
or whatever we'd need that's used across servlet boundaries.
To use the ServletContext parameters,
we need to add a context-param entry to the web.xml file.
So we say context-param, and in here we give the parameter a name,
so again we'll use ProductName.
And we give it a value, so we can call this maybe Servlet Context product name.
Then in the servlet, rather than just calling getInitParameter,
we'd call getServletContext.getInitParameter,
and that would pass us the context parameter.
Again, if we deploy this, and then go to the browser,
you can see we currently have Yet Another Product
Name as the name of the product.
If we refresh, we see Servlet Context Product Name.
So we're now using the name from the context parameters, so that's the global parameter that we're using.